FR #1082: Clarify requirements to cover all invoiced charges in FOCUS datasets (#1321)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/attributes/invoice_handling.md

FinOps practitioners must be able to reconcile FOCUS datasets with the corresponding invoices and usage statements they receive from [*Invoice Issuers*](#glossary:InvoiceIssuer). In practice, this means ensuring that all monetary [*charges*](#glossary:charge) that appear on an invoice or usage statement — including those not tied to metered usage — are represented in the [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset). Without this alignment, it becomes difficult to perform accurate invoice reconciliation, financial reporting, and chargeback.

This attribute introduces requirements for how charges such as usage, taxes, credits, refunds, etc, inclusive of support, training, and marketplace transactions, and any other type of charge should be captured and categorized. It also defines expectations around the completeness and consistency of invoice-level totals within the dataset, enabling FOCUS datasets to be used in a system of record for all invoiced costs.

## Attribute ID

InvoiceHandling

## Attribute Name

Invoice Handling

## Description

Indicates how invoice-level *charges*, including those not directly tied to usage, should be represented in a FOCUS dataset. 

## Requirements

> * All costs that appear on an invoice MUST be present in the *FOCUS dataset*.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be "FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset"?

Author: Yeah, that's a good point. Let me sync with Shawn, as I don't think we have a glossary term (yet) for the FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset drafted. It may be something we tackle during consistency review, but I agree it's something we should be more specific on.

Reviewer 2: To my mind, the verbiage as stated here is fine because, going forward, we are going to explicitly declare the association of attributes with datasets (per PR #1431, which is scheduled to be approved by the Members tomorrow).  _That_ is where the association happens, not here.

I don't think we need to change this line.

Reviewer: But a SKU catalog will eventually be a "FOCUS dataset" and this statement doesn't apply to a SKU catalog, right? I think this requirement only applies to the cost and usage dataset.

Reviewer 2: You're right that it only applies to the Cost and Usage dataset (for now; maybe another dataset comes along in the future for which this is also applicable).  And the explicit association of attributes with datasets per #1431 is where we should make that clear.

Once #1431 has been approved (in theory, that's tomorrow, alongside this one), it should carry the line:

> * CostAndUsage MUST conform to [InvoiceHandling](#invoicehandling) requirements.

We could make a note on #1431 that we will add that line once #1321 gets approved, or delay the approval of #1321 one more week so that @Matt-Cowsert can make use of #1431 to add that line to this PR.

Author: As this is a minor follow-on change and we have number of PRs to review/seek approval with members, I'd prefer to make the note on #1431, approve #1321 as is, and make a separate PR to add the improved language once it's been approved. @shawnalpay @flanakin

Reviewer 2: I have now recorded that note on #1431 [here](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1431/files#r2338474379).

I defer to @flanakin to decide whether that addresses his original concern.

> * All costs that appear on an invoice MUST be present in the *FOCUS dataset*.

Reviewer: Does this imply that all charges invoiced by a provider must be covered by FOCUS cost? It seems to imply that. But where's the line?

Author: It doesn't imply it, it mandates it explicitly. If you have a suggestion on how to improve the language, I'm all ears.

Reviewer: I can read this as "costs that appear in any invoice that you would ever get from the provider" or "costs that appear in a single invoice". Both of those need to be handled differently.

We already have requirements on BilledCost, I believe, stating that cost and individual invoices should align. That's fine. My concern is the other perspective, which I don't feel is very clear.

This could be interpreted as *EVERY* invoice that comes from a company must be included in a single cost and usage dataset. I don't know how feasible that is from every provider. I know Microsoft has legacy systems that have invoices and will never be in the FOCUS data. Based on conversations with Gartner, that seems to be very common across the industry.

I would argue this loose implication (which is not explicit) should be clearer about all charges in covered invoices should be in the cost and usage dataset. If we say all invoices across all things a company could ever do, then that probably needs to be a "SHOULD".

Author: Hey @flanakin . We discussed this specific point on the call with TF-3 last Friday. The consensus we reached on that call was to state the requirement as a MUST and recognize that not all providers will be able to meet this requirement. From a practical standpoint, I expect this requirement to sit outside of the "essential" list of requirements that need to be met for conformance certification. Notes from the call captured [here](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/1082#issuecomment-3293526565)

Reviewer: If it's not essential, why is it a MUST?

Reviewer 2: Discussed in Sep 18 Members.  While "SHOULD" or "MUST" are perhaps both acceptable for both @kk09v and @flanakin, what is more at issue is the scope of what "all" means.

Reviewer 2: Per @flanakin: maybe there is utility to saying "you SHOULD include X" and "you MUST include Y".

Reviewer 2: Discussed in Sep 19 TF3.  We all like the idea @kk09v offered to @ijurica yesterday around tying this to BillingAccountId.  I will coordinate with him to get a suggestion put forward.

Reviewer 2: @Matt-Cowsert, you have now addressed this via the addition of verbiage for BillingAccountId. 

I believe you can now resolve this comment, and leave it to @flanakin to reopen if necessary.

> * All costs that appear on an invoice SHOULD be present in the *FOCUS dataset*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* All costs that appear on an invoice MUST be present in the *FOCUS dataset*.
```

Reviewer 3: This line conflicts with newly added line 16; suggesting changing this to MUST to align
```
The sum of BilledCost for a given [InvoiceId](#invoiceid) MUST match the sum of the payable amount provided in the corresponding invoice with the same id generated by the [InvoiceIssuer](#InvoiceIssuer).
```

Author: This is a good callout Larry, thanks for pointing this out. I'm going to accept the suggestion and socialize with TF-3 tomorrow before going back to member review / approval.

> * All costs that appear on an invoice MUST be included in the FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset.

Reviewer 4: perhaps?

```suggestion
* All costs that appear on an invoice related to Information Technology MUST be included in the FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset.
```

Reviewer 2: Perhaps... but even then, this PR would need a section defining what _that_ means.  Per feedback in the Members meeting today, I don't think there's a way to escape some scope of charges defined, either in this attribute or in the glossary, and then reference that.

Author: I took a stab at the scope, tying the scope of charges to the billing account (thanks for that recommendation @kk09v ). 

I also added some additional details in the exceptions section for informational/supplemental details that sometimes show up on the invoice of certain providers. If we don't think the clarification is needed at this time, I'm fine with striking it, but we'll want to revisit this in future releases.

Author: resolving this as I believe we've landed on the scope we're envisioning

> * When an InvoiceId appears in the *FOCUS dataset*, all costs from that invoice MUST be included in the dataset.

Reviewer 4: - Regarding the requirement tied to a **specific InvoiceId**, as @flanakin mentioned, **payable costs** are already covered through a combination of definitions and existing requirements:
  - **Invoice Issuer definition:** *An Invoice Issuer is an entity responsible for issuing payable invoices for the resources or services consumed.*
    - *(out of scope of this PR)* We may want to revisit whether "consumed" is sufficient here, or if it should be "used or purchased" to better cover purchase scenarios.
    - *(out of scope of this PR)* We're also discussing whether the Invoice Issuer should be limited to entities issuing only payable invoices.
  - **BilledCost requirement:** *The sum of the BilledCost for a given InvoiceId MUST match the sum of the payable amount provided in the corresponding invoice with the same id generated by the InvoiceIssuerName.*
  - **BillingCurrency requirement:** *BillingCurrency MUST match the currency used in the invoice generated by the Invoice Issuer.*

- Regarding the broader interpretation - that all costs from all invoices ever issued must (or should) be present in the FOCUS dataset - I agree this represents our **north star** goal.
  While it's unlikely that all providers or Invoice Issuers will be able to fully meet this (especially due to legacy systems), it's still the direction we want to move toward, at least for **payable costs** and **issued invoices**.
  - The key question is: **Do we want the requirement to reflect our ideal target (MUST), or do we want to accommodate provider, i.e., invoice issuer limitations (SHOULD)?**  
    *I believe I've heard this question before* 😄

```suggestion
* All payable costs that appear on an invoice MUST be present in a *FOCUS dataset*.
* All non-payable costs that appear on an invoice SHOULD be present in a *FOCUS dataset*.
```

Author: We agreed during the TF-3 call on 9/12 to revert to the language in the original PR, which is simpler

> * If an invoice-level *charge* appears on a customer’s invoice but cannot be fully represented using existing FOCUS columns, providers SHOULD include supplemental columns (e.g., x_ChargeSubType) to ensure that the details of the invoice *charge* are captured in the *FOCUS dataset*. 

Reviewer: What does "fully represented" mean? I feel like this may get misunderstood and generally missed. It sounds like it's asking for custom columns to be added for anything necessary to explain the row, but it's doing it in a way that has no teeth, as far as I can tell. Maybe it's just me tho.

Author: Let me try to sharpen the language and let me know what you think of it.

FinOps practitioners must be able to reconcile FOCUS datasets with the corresponding invoices and usage statements they receive from [*Invoice Issuers*](#glossary:InvoiceIssuer). In practice, this means ensuring that all monetary [*charges*](#glossary:charge) that appear on an invoice or usage statement — including those not tied to metered usage — are represented in the [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset). Without this alignment, it becomes difficult to perform accurate invoice reconciliation, financial reporting, and chargeback.

This attribute introduces requirements for how charges such as usage, taxes, credits, refunds, etc, inclusive of support, training, and marketplace transactions, and any other type of charge should be captured and categorized. It also defines expectations around the completeness and consistency of invoice-level totals within the dataset, enabling FOCUS datasets to be used in a system of record for all invoiced costs.

## Attribute ID

InvoiceHandling

## Attribute Name

Invoice Handling

## Description

Indicates how invoice-level *charges*, including those not directly tied to usage, should be represented in a FOCUS dataset. 

## Requirements

> * All costs that appear on an invoice SHOULD be present in the FOCUS dataset.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* All costs that appear on an invoice SHOULD be present in the *FOCUS dataset*.
```

> * Invoice-level charges MAY be expressed as individual rows or as part of aggregated rows, provided they remain distinguishable and use or closely align with the FOCUS schema.

Reviewer 2: Per discussion in Aug 28 Members: this line currently reads like an FYI to me.  If that's true, it should be struck as a requirement and rephrased in the description section above.

However, @ijurica expressed the belief that there is a "hidden MUST" in here, and thus it should be rephrased here to reflect that.  I will leave it to her to mention what that should be.

Author: we aligned during TF-3 that the simplest approach is to strike this as a normative requirement. Even putting it in the description is an unnecessary elaboration.

> * Invoice-level charges MAY be expressed as individual rows or as part of aggregated rows, provided they remain distinguishable and use or closely align with the FOCUS schema.

Reviewer 4: ### Discussion Topic

We should decide on a general approach regarding whether normative requirements that are already specified at the column level should also be repeated (in full or in reference form) within overarching attribute sections (e.g., Invoice Handling, Discount Handling, etc.).

Options:

- **Do not duplicate:** Keep normative requirements only at the column level, and avoid repeating them in overarching attribute sections.

- **Repeat with reference:** Reiterate key normative requirements in the overarching section, but include a note that they are defined at the column level.
Example:

> The sum of the BilledCost for a given InvoiceId MUST match the sum of the payable amount **denominated in the Billing Currency** provided in the corresponding invoice with the same id generated by the InvoiceIssuer, **as defined in the BilledCost column requirements**.

- **Add a general reference:** Include a general statement in the overarching section (i.e., invoice handling attribute that points to the normative requirements defined at the column level. (Karl may have already done something similar for Split Cost)

---

Note: I plan to provide some additional feedback on this particular  requirement:

> * Invoice-level charges MAY be expressed as individual rows or as part of aggregated rows, provided they remain distinguishable and use or closely align with the FOCUS schema.

Author: I've removed this, but let me know @ijurica if we still need to discuss the meta points in your options

Reviewer 4: @Matt-Cowsert , I agree that the question I raised here is really part of a broader discussion.

I mentioned that I thought this requirement should be phrased differently, but the more I think about it, the more I believe what I had in mind is already covered by the existing requirement on BilledCost.

Resolving this conversation.

> * If an invoice-level transaction appears on a customer’s invoice but cannot be fully represented using existing FOCUS columns, providers SHOULD include supplemental columns (e.g., x_ChargeSubType) to ensure that the invoice charge is captured in the FOCUS dataset. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* If an invoice-level *charge* appears on a customer’s invoice but cannot be fully represented using existing FOCUS columns, providers SHOULD include supplemental columns (e.g., x_ChargeSubType) to ensure that the details of the invoice *charge* are captured in the *FOCUS dataset*. 
```

# Invoice Handling

> FinOps practitioners must be able to reconcile FOCUS datasets with the corresponding invoices and usage statements they receive from providers. In practice, this means ensuring that all monetary charges that appear on an invoice or usage statement — including those not tied to metered usage — are represented in the FOCUS dataset. Without this alignment, it becomes difficult to perform accurate invoice reconciliation, financial reporting, and chargeback.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
FinOps practitioners must be able to reconcile FOCUS datasets with the corresponding invoices and usage statements they receive from [*Invoice Issuers*](#glossary:InvoiceIssuer). In practice, this means ensuring that all monetary [*charges*](#glossary:charge) that appear on an invoice or usage statement — including those not tied to metered usage — are represented in the [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset). Without this alignment, it becomes difficult to perform accurate invoice reconciliation, financial reporting, and chargeback.
```

> This attribute introduces requirements for how charges such as usage, taxes, credits, refunds, etc, inclusive of support, training, and marketplace transactions, and any other type of charge SHOULD be captured and categorized. It also defines expectations around the completeness and consistency of invoice-level totals within the dataset, enabling FOCUS to serve as a reliable system of record for all invoiced costs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This attribute introduces requirements for how charges such as usage, taxes, credits, refunds, etc, inclusive of support, training, and marketplace transactions, and any other type of charge should be captured and categorized. It also defines expectations around the completeness and consistency of invoice-level totals within the dataset, enabling FOCUS datasets to be used in a system of record for all invoiced costs.
```
I think you want to put the normative requirements in the Requirements section.

## Attribute ID

InvoiceHandling

## Attribute Name

Invoice Handling

## Description

> Indicates how invoice-level transactions, including those not directly tied to usage, should be represented in a FOCUS dataset. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Indicates how invoice-level *charges*, including those not directly tied to usage, should be represented in a FOCUS dataset. 
```

Seems like rather than introduce a new concept called 'transaction' we should stick to charges.

## Requirements

* All costs that appear on an invoice SHOULD be present in the FOCUS dataset.

> * Invoice-level transactions MAY be expressed as individual rows or as part of aggregated rows, provided they remain distinguishable using existing FOCUS dimensions and metrics.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Invoice-level *charges* MAY use or closely align with the FOCUS schema.
```

Author: Fully agree with replacing transactions with charges and I can simplify the FOCUS schema. However, I don't want to remove the individual vs. aggregate row call out, as I think it's important to acknowledge there isn't always a 1:1 relationship between invoice-level charges and what's represented within a FOCUS dataset.

> * ChargeCategory SHOULD be used to differentiate types of non-usage charges (e.g., "Tax", "Credit", "Purchase", "Adjustment").

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* ChargeCategory SHOULD be used to differentiate types of non-usage *charges* (e.g., "Tax", "Credit", "Purchase", "Adjustment").
```

> * If an invoice-level transaction appears on a customer’s invoice but cannot be fully represented using existing FOCUS columns, providers SHOULD include supplemental columns (e.g., x_ChargeSubType) to ensure that the invoice charge is captured in the FOCUS dataset. 
> * The total cost associated with a given Invoice ID in the FOCUS dataset SHOULD match the total cost presented on the associated invoice.
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* The total cost associated with a given Invoice ID in a *FOCUS dataset* MUST match the total cost presented on the associated invoice.

```

This really seems like the core requirement here and likely belongs in the InvoiceId.

Author: I agree with the suggestion and will represent this requirement within the Invoice ID normative requirements, rather than the invoice-handling section.

## Exceptions

> * Invoice corrections or adjustments applied outside the represented billing period MAY be excluded from the current dataset if they are expected to appear in a subsequent period’s FOCUS dataset.

Reviewer 5: Not sure if this is needed. This would be true anyway, you have charges coming in a different billing period, they would have their own invoice id that corresponds to the invoice(s) that map to that billing period.

Author: agreed, removing

# Invoice Handling

> FinOps practitioners must be able to reconcile structured billing data with the invoices they receive from providers. In practice, this means ensuring that all monetary charges that appear on an invoice — including those not tied to metered usage — are represented in the FOCUS dataset. Without this alignment, it becomes difficult to perform accurate invoice reconciliation, financial reporting, and chargeback.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
FinOps practitioners must be able to reconcile FOCUS datasets with the corresponding invoices and usage statements they receive from providers. In practice, this means ensuring that all monetary charges that appear on an invoice or usage statement — including those not tied to metered usage — are represented in the FOCUS dataset. Without this alignment, it becomes difficult to perform accurate invoice reconciliation, financial reporting, and chargeback.
```

> This attribute introduces requirements for how non-usage charges such as taxes, credits, refunds, support, training, and marketplace transactions SHOULD be captured and categorized. It also defines expectations around the completeness and consistency of invoice-level totals within the dataset, enabling FOCUS to serve as a reliable system of record for all invoiced costs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This attribute introduces requirements for how charges such as usage, taxes, credits, refunds, etc, inclusive of support, training, and marketplace transactions, and any other type of charge SHOULD be captured and categorized. It also defines expectations around the completeness and consistency of invoice-level totals within the dataset, enabling FOCUS to serve as a reliable system of record for all invoiced costs.
```

## Attribute ID

InvoiceHandling

## Attribute Name

Invoice Handling

## Description

> Indicates how invoice-level monetary charges, including those not directly tied to usage, SHOULD be represented in a FOCUS dataset. 

Reviewer 2: SHOULD doesn't need capitalization here.  All caps are only used in normative requirements.
```suggestion
Indicates how invoice-level monetary charges, including those not directly tied to usage, should be represented in a FOCUS dataset. 
```

## Requirements

* All costs that appear on an invoice SHOULD be present in the FOCUS dataset.
* Monetary transactions MAY be expressed as individual rows or as part of aggregated rows, provided they remain distinguishable using existing FOCUS dimensions and metrics.

> * ChargeCategory SHOULD be used to differentiate types of non-usage charges (e.g., “Tax”, “Credit”, “Purchase”, “Support”).

Reviewer 4: Note: 
- Among the listed items, "Support" is not a valid allowed value for Charge Category.
- Valid Charge Categories include: "Usage", "Purchase", "Credit", "Tax", and "Adjustment".

```suggestion
* ChargeCategory SHOULD be used to differentiate types of non-usage charges (e.g., "Tax", "Credit", "Purchase", "Adjustment").
```

> * ChargeCategory SHOULD be used to differentiate types of non-usage charges (e.g., "Tax", "Credit", "Purchase", "Adjustment").

Reviewer 2: Is this the right place to put a requirement that applies only to one column?  (Genuine question; I'm not sure the answer.)

An alternative might be to put this normative requirement directly within `ChargeCategory`, given that it's applicable only to that one column as currently written.

Author: I'm fine with either approach. I'll bring it to TF-3 for discussion and will align with the TF on where we should place it.

Author: I've moved this to the ChargeCategory normative text. We mentioned in the TF-3 call to reference the normative text within the invoice-handling section as well, but it wasn't clear to me that was necessary (or how) to reference a single requirement from another column.

> * If a monetary transaction cannot be expressed using existing FOCUS fields, providers SHOULD include supplemental columns (e.g., x_ChargeSubType) to capture this information.

Reviewer 4: nit:

```suggestion
* If a monetary transaction cannot be expressed using existing FOCUS columns, providers SHOULD include supplemental columns (e.g., x_ChargeSubType) to capture this information.
```

BTW, Providers vs Data Generators is a separate discussion topic 😄

> * If a monetary transaction cannot be expressed using existing FOCUS columns, providers SHOULD include supplemental columns (e.g., x_ChargeSubType) to capture this information.

Reviewer 5: This to me reads as if we're expecting invoice issuers to provide FOCUS terminology in the invoice which seems not practical IMO. Invoices due to the way they're commonly provided (PDFs that are roughly A4 paper size) will not be able to provide highly tablular data. This means commonly things like taxes and discounts are handled in an overall manner (typically at the bottom of a simple tabular dataset.

Author: The intent of this requirement isn't to dictate the format of the invoice, rather to ensure the transactions captured on the invoice are present within the FOCUS dataset. I'll re-write the requirement to be more specific. Thanks for calling out the ambiguity.

* The total cost associated with a given Invoice ID in the FOCUS dataset SHOULD match the total cost presented on the associated invoice.

## Exceptions

* Invoice corrections or adjustments applied outside the represented billing period MAY be excluded from the current dataset if they are expected to appear in a subsequent period’s FOCUS dataset.

> * Charges withheld due to legal, regulatory, or contractual restrictions MAY be omitted if they cannot be shared within structured billing data. In such cases, the data generator SHOULD document the reason for exclusion and MAY include a redacted or summarized charge entry with explanatory metadata.

Reviewer 2: @ijurica How should we should structure this section of multiple normative requirements with bullets?

Author: we aligned with removing this exception for the time being, as we don't have an example to lean on and view it as a two way door that we can add later if needed.

This attribute introduces requirements for how charges such as usage, taxes, credits, refunds, etc, inclusive of support, training, and marketplace transactions, and any other type of charge should be captured and categorized. It also defines expectations around the completeness and consistency of invoice-level totals within the dataset, enabling FOCUS datasets to be used in a system of record for all invoiced costs.

## Attribute ID

InvoiceHandling

## Attribute Name

Invoice Handling

## Description

Indicates how invoice-level *charges*, including those not directly tied to usage, should be represented in a FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset.

## Requirements

> * All costs that appear on an invoice issued to a [*BillingAccountId*](#billingaccountid) MUST be included in the FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset.

Reviewer 4: Assuming our intent is to ensure that **all invoices related to a billing account** are reflected in the Cost and Usage dataset I suggest:

```suggestion
* All costs that appear on any invoice issued to a [*BillingAccountId*](#billingaccountid) MUST be included in the FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset.
```

Reviewer 2: Agree.

* If an invoice-level *charge* appears on a customer invoice but cannot be expressed using existing FOCUS columns, providers MUST include provider-defined columns (e.g., x_ChargeSubType) to capture the non-FOCUS-defined details needed to support invoice *charges* reconciliation using the FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset.

## Exceptions

* Informational line items that have zero monetary impact and are included solely for transparency MAY be excluded. Examples include:
  * Free tier usage tracking with $0.00 charges

>   * Breakdowns of bundled services where only the bundle total is billed

Reviewer 4: I believe these information should (even must) be included in the Cost and Usage dataset artifacts, as the dataset is intended to reflect both cost and usage, not just monetary impact.

Reviewer 2: Agree.  @ijurica Are you suggesting we strike these lines?

Author: Understood, will strike the bundles service line. @ijurica are you fine with the other expections listed?

Reviewer 2: @Matt-Cowsert This is taking issue with both of the highlighted lines, which includes `Free tier usage tracking with $0.00 charges`.  I agree that that is not a valid exception, as that is meaningful information.

Both of those lines should be struck, and then I believe you can resolve this.

Author: understood, thanks for the clarification @shawnalpay making the adjustment now

## Requirements

> * All costs that appear on an invoice issued to a [*Billing Account*](#glossary:BillingAccount) MUST be included in the FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* All costs that appear on an invoice issued to a [*BillingAccountId*](#billingaccountid) MUST be included in the FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset.
```
